Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
Ido Amos 1 2 * Avi Caciularu1 Mor Geva 1 3 Amir Globerson 1 3 Jonathan Herzig 1 Lior Shani 1 Idan Szpektor 1
Abstract
Reasoning with a chain-of-thought (CoT) enables
Large Language Models (LLMs) to solve complex
tasks but incurs significant inference costs due to
the generation of long rationales. We propose
Thinking States, a method that performs reason-
ingwhilethe input is processing. Specifically,
Thinking States generates sequences of thinking
tokens every few input tokens, transforms the
thoughts back into embedding space, and adds
them to the following input tokens. This has two
key advantages. First, it captures the recurrent
nature of CoT, but where the thought tokens are
generated as input is processing. Second, since
the thoughts are represented as tokens, they can be
learned from natural language supervision, and us-
ing teacher-forcing, which is parallelizable. Em-
pirically, Thinking States outperforms other latent
reasoning methods on multiple reasoning tasks,
narrowing the gap to CoT on math problems, and
matching its performance on 2-Hop QA with im-
proved latency. On state-tracking tasks, we show
Thinking States leads to stronger reasoning behav-
ior than CoT, successfully extrapolating to longer
sequences than seen during training.
1. Introduction
Generating intermediate reasoning steps prior to answer-
ing enables large language models (LLMs) to tackle chal-
lenging problems with considerably greater accuracy (Wei
et al., 2022). Such chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning yields
substantial performance gains, but may incur significant
inference-time cost because of generating additional tokens.
Thus, the challenge of reducing computational cost of rea-
soning while preserving accuracy has attracted considerable
attention recently (Xia et al., 2025; Kang et al., 2024; Hassid
et al., 2025; Hao et al., 2024).
One approach to reducing reasoning tokens is to not require
*Work done during an internship at Google Research. 1Google
Research 2The Hebrew University of Jerusalem 3Tel Aviv Univer-
sity. Correspondence to: Ido Amos<idoamos@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Preprint. February 10, 2026.
thinking tokens to be in natural language, but rather be con-
tinuous embeddings (Hao et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2025).
Indeed, language is highly redundant, and one can therefore
expect shorter reasoning traces in this case. On the other
hand, it is then harder to supervise these “continuous latent”
thoughts, as target values for the latents are unknown, which
requires backpropagation through time (BPTT) from the
desired outcome, making training considerably more chal-
lenging and limiting the number of latents that can be used
in practice. An alternative approach has been to distill the
thinking pattern directly to the representations of the query,
rather than generate any extra tokens (Deng et al., 2024).
While supporting parallel training, the resulting architecture
cannot effectively condition on thoughts. As queries are pro-
cessed in parallel, sequential thinking can only be realized
through the LLM’s depth, which is typically fixed, resulting
in reduced expressivity compared to CoT models.1
Motivated by these previous works we present an architec-
ture that allows conditioning on thinking as in CoT, yet does
not append thinking tokens to the context or suffer from
optimization with BPTT. OurThinking Statesmodel builds
on several key ideas, illustrated in Figure 1.Compute Shar-
ing:thoughts are generated using representations of existing
tokens.Recurrence:these thoughts are fed back as input
(as in regular CoT) along with future tokens, not increasing
the context length.Supervision with Natural Language:
the thought tokens can be supervised via natural language,
and thus benefit from available supervision used by prior
CoT methods, and maintain interpretability.
We evaluate Thinking States on synthetic and real-world
datasets, demonstrating that it is more accurate than base-
lines that reduce CoT lengths, and provides a significant
latency advantage compared to CoT. Moreover, we demon-
strate that Thinking States can be trained significantly faster
than models with latent thoughts that require BPTT.
Our contributions are as follows:
(i) We introduce Thinking States, a recurrent reasoning
mechanism that generates natural-language thoughts
while processing the input, without increasing the con-
1Put differently, CoT can be viewed as providing the model
with additional depth, which Deng et al. (2024) does not benefit
from.
1
arXiv:2602.08332v1  [cs.CL]  9 Feb 2026
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
LLM
Language 
Tokens
Thinking
States
Thinking States Chain-of-Thought
C
CCompression
Block
⠇S
S
S
C
⠇
Figure 1.Reasoning with aThinking Statecompared to Chain-of-Thought: An LLM is trained to generate task-relevant thinkingsequences
while processing tokens. Each generated thought sequence is transformed into a fixed-size state, denoted by S, added to the following
token representations.
text length.
(ii) Because thoughts are represented in natural language,
Thinking States can be trained with teacher-forcing
the thoughts, enabling fully parallel training and avoid-
ing the computational overhead of backpropagation
through time.
(iii) We demonstrate that Thinking States consistently out-
performs existing latent reasoning methods on vari-
ous benchmarks, matches or exceeds CoT accuracy on
multi-hop QA and state-tracking tasks, and achieves
significant speedups compared to CoT on all tasks.
2. Related Work
Latent Reasoning.A prominent line of research focuses
on adapting pretrained LLMs to internalize chain-of-thought
(CoT) reasoning into compressed representations. Initial
efforts distilled knowledge from a CoT-capable teacher
model directly into the query representations of a student
model (Deng et al., 2023). A related approach employs
an iterative training curriculum that progressively removes
explicit reasoning steps from the supervision signal, com-
pelling the model to internalize the reasoning process (Deng
et al., 2024). Hao et al. (2024) extended this idea by in-
troducing recurrent “continuous thought tokens” that are
iteratively refined after processing the query. While promis-
ing, this recurrent formulation necessitates backpropagation
through time (BPTT), which is computationally intensive
and limits scalability. More recently, Shen et al. (2025)
proposed adding a distillation loss that aligns the student’s
latent representations with those of a CoT-based teacher, re-
moving reliance on the iterative curriculum. However, this
approach still requires BPTT for optimization and incurs the
additional computational cost of a separate teacher model.
Emergent Latent Reasoning in Standard LLMs.Re-
cent studies have revealed that standard LLMs can exhibit
latent reasoning capabilities without explicit training. Biran
et al. (2024) demonstrated this by successfully decoding
intermediate reasoning steps from the model’s hidden states,
while Yang et al. (2024) showed that LLMs can arrive at
correct answers on queries that inherently require multi-
hop reasoning. These findings suggest that some degree
of latent reasoning emerges naturally during pretraining,
making multi-hop question answering, which we include in
our evaluation, an important testbed for methods designed
to enhance this capability.
Alternative Approaches to Latent Computation.A dis-
tinct line of work aims to improve reasoning by providing
models with additional computation time, rather than by in-
ternalizing a specific reasoning trace. Goyal et al. (2023) in-
troduced “pause tokens” during pretraining—tokens without
semantic meaning that give the model extra computational
steps before producing output, improving performance on
downstream reasoning tasks. Geiping et al. (2025) proposed
dynamic depth, where the same block of layers is applied
repeatedly for a variable number of iterations, effectively
increasing computation per token at inference time. Finally,
Zelikman et al. (2024) enabled token-level rationale gener-
ation by decoding auxiliary reasoning tokens before each
prediction, training the model with reinforcement learning
to produce helpful rationales. Unlike our approach, these
auxiliary tokens influence only the current prediction and
are discarded afterward, avoiding recurrent dependencies
but also forgoing the ability to carry reasoning state across
positions.
2
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
KV Cache T C
Zi+3
Si+2
T C
Zi
+
Si
 Si+1
⠇ Si+3
Lout
Lin
⠇
T C
Zi+2
⠇ ⠇ ⠇
⠇ ⠇
+ + +
(a)Inference
tails heads
heads <EOS>tails <EOS>
Predictions
Labels
tails
✓      X
<EOS>Labels
Loss
A coin’s state is heads. Alice flips, then Bob flips. What’s the state? A: heads.
T
C C
⠇
⠇
⠇
⠇
⠇
⠇
⠇
⠇
heads <EOS>
heads <EOS>
✓ ✓
T
Si+1
 Si+3
<EOS>
C
Si+2
<EOS>
C
Si
 (b)Training
Figure 2. Thinking Statesmodel at inference and training time. At inference time(a),Thinking Statesreasons by iteratively processing
token chunks. At each iteration i, reasoning information encoded up to layer Lout is decoded by a thinking block T and compressed
by a compression block C to a fixed-sizethinking state Si+1. The state is injected to the next chunk at a shallow layer to effectively
influence future computations. Chunk representations can access the history via attention layers and the KV-cache. At training time(b),
predictions by T are supervised by explicit annotations paired with each chunk. The same annotations are used to condition the base
LLM’s reasoning, allowing parallel training.
3. Thinking State Architecture and
Supervision
We introduce theThinking Statesmodel, illustrated in Fig-
ure 2a. The core element of our architecture is a chunk-
recurrent process of decoding thoughts from token repre-
sentations, compressing thoughts into a fixed-size state, and
injecting the state into representations of subsequent tokens
at a shallow layer (e.g., the first layer).
Because thoughts are decoded from representations in a
deep layer (e.g., second to last), we leverage the backbone
LLM to perform the bulk of the computation. This allows
the decoding”Thinking Block”to remain lightweight and
efficient, as it operates on a rich feature space. By injecting
the compressed state into representations of future tokens at
a shallow layer, we effectively condition on the reasoning
process without extending the context. Sections 3.2, 3.3,
provide details on how this recurrent process is executed
efficiently at training and inference time.
Setting.Let an input sequence of L tokens be partitioned
into K non-overlapping chunks X1, . . . ,XK.2 Each Xi ∈
Rc×d denotes the input embeddings of c tokens (where c=
L/K) with hidden dimension d, extracted after a designated
shallow layerL in of the LLM.
2In the case Lmodc̸= 0 , input tokens are grouped into
chunks along with generated tokens, once those are available.
Our architecture augments a backbone LLM Mθ with two
additional modules:
(i) Thinking Block T : A lightweight Transformer decoder
(one layer in our experiments) that autoregressively
generates a reasoning sequence Z= (z 1, . . . , zn) in
natural language.
(ii) Compression Block C: A Transformer encoder with a
pooling layer that maps any variable-length reasoning
sequence into a fixed-size stateS∈R c×d.
Further architectural details for T and C are provided in
Appendix A.1.
3.1. Architecture
Thinking States processes token chunks iteratively while
maintaining a state Si ∈R c×d. At each step i, we first
inject the current state into the input representations at the
shallow layer, then forward throughM θ:
˜Xi =X i +S i (1)
Hout
i =M θ( ˜Xi | ˜X<i)(2)
Here, Hout
i denotes the chunk representations at a prede-
fined deep layer Lout, and past representations ˜X<i are
accessed through the KV-cache.
3
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
Next, Hout
i is used to generate a sequence of natural-
language thought tokens via the Thinking Block:
Zi+1 =T(H out
i )(3)
The output Zi+1 is a variable-length token sequence ending
with an <EOS> token. When no reasoning is required, Zi+1
may consist solely of<EOS>.
Finally, the Compression Block transforms the variable-
length thought sequence into a fixed-size state for the next
iteration:
Si+1 =C(Z i+1)∈R c×d (4)
For the first chunk, we initializeS 1 =0.
This design serves two key ideas: compute sharing and re-
currence. As inputs are a sum of tokens and states, eq. (1-2),
the model effectively performs next token prediction while
processing and generating states, executing both compu-
tations in a single forward pass. By injecting states at a
shallow layer, we allow thoughts to effectively condition
future thoughts through most of the LLM’s hidden layers.
Importantly, since the thought tokens are never appended to
the backbone’s context window, the context length remains
fixed.
3.2. Training with Teacher-Forced Reasoning
To supervise the generated thinking sequences Zi, we rely
on explicit natural-language annotations. In our formulation,
each token chunk in the training data is paired with a target
reasoning sequence Z∗
i of variable length. For chunks that
require no intermediate reasoning, the target is simply the
<EOS>token.
Access to these ground-truth sequences Z∗
i serves a dual
purpose. As illustrated in Figure 2b, in addition to providing
supervision for the outputs of T , we use Z∗
i toteacher-force
the states injected into the backbone LLM. Specifically, we
compute the target state as S∗
i =C(Z ∗
i ) and inject it instead
of the model-generated state:
˜Xi =X i +S ∗
i (5)
Since all target sequencesZ ∗
i are available upfront, we can
compute all chunk representations Hout
i in a single parallel
forward pass through Mθ. This eliminates the need for back-
propagation through time (BPTT), dramatically reducing
the computational cost of training.
After this forward pass, the Thinking Block T is trained to
predict Z∗
i via standard next-token prediction, in parallel
over all chunks. Here, eachHout
i is computed under the gold
state history S∗
1, . . . ,S∗
i , so predicting Zi+1 is implicitly
conditioned on all prior gold reasoning steps.
We optimize the joint objective:
L=L LM +
KX
i=1
LT(Zi,Z ∗
i )(6)
where LLM is the standard language modeling loss and LT
is cross-entropy loss over the thinking sequences. This
formulation enables fully parallel training while ensuring
that T learns to generate thoughts consistent with a valid
reasoning history.
3.3. Fast Prefill with Speculative Thinking
While training is fully parallelizable, na ¨ıve inference re-
mains sequential across chunks, as each ˜Xi depends on the
previous state Si. This can significantly increase latency
during query prefill.
To mitigate this overhead, we exploit a key observation: for
most chunks, the generated state istrivial, that is, the Think-
ing Block produces only an <EOS> token. We leverage this
sparsity to design an iterative yetexactprefill algorithm.
The algorithm proceeds as follows:
1. Perform a parallel forward pass over all chunks, specu-
lating that all states are trivial.
2. For each chunk, generate thinking states using T and
C.
3. Identify the earliest chunki1 that produces a non-trivial
state. Since all chunks before i1 truly have trivial states,
the computation up to chunki 1 is correct.
4. Cache all positions up to i1 and repeat from step 1 for
the remaining chunks, now conditioning on the correct
state Si1 and speculating a trivial state for following
chunks.
The procedure terminates when no new non-trivial states are
generated, yielding exactly the same result as full sequential
prefill. If |R| denotes the (unknown a priori) number of
chunks with non-trivial states, the algorithm completes in
exactly |R|+ 1 rounds. In typical regimes where |R| ≪
K, this substantially reduces prefill latency. A complete
description of the algorithm is provided in Appendix A.2.
3.4. Constructing Chunk-Level Supervision
Training the Thinking Block requires supervision that spec-
ifies bothwhereintermediate reasoning should occur and
whatreasoning content to produce. We construct this super-
vision by aligning CoT reasoning steps to specific positions
in the input query.
Consider the following example query and its CoT trajec-
tory:
4
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
“A coin’s state is heads. Alice flips, then Bob flips.
What’s the state?”
CoT:“heads→tails→heads”
Our goal is to map each reasoning step (which may span
multiple tokens) to a specific position in the query where
that step becomes inferable.
Step-to-Token Alignment.We first align each reasoning
step to the earliest query position where it can be logically in-
ferred. This alignment is obtained either via a strong teacher
model, e.g., Gemini 2.5-Flash (Comanici et al., 2025), or
through programmatic rules when the task structure permits.
The alignment is represented by inserting special indicator
tokens<T>into the text:
“A coin’s state is heads.<T> Alice flips,<T> then
Bob flips.<T>What’s the state?”
Each <T> marker indicates that the preceding context is
sufficient to infer the corresponding reasoning step. We then
tokenize the query and construct a corresponding reasoning
array with the same length, where each position in the array
is either empty or contains the reasoning step associated
with the <T> token. The indicator tokens are removed after
this alignment, ensuring they are never seen by the model
during training.
Token-to-Chunk Alignment.Given the aligned token
sequence and reasoning array, we partition both into non-
overlapping chunks of size c. The target reasoning sequence
for each chunk is the concatenation of all reasoning steps
assigned to tokens within that chunk. For chunks with no
associated reasoning steps, the target is simply the <EOS>
token.
The entire process is applied only to the training data of
each task we consider. Additional details can be found in
Appendix A.3.
4. Experiments
We evaluate Thinking States on a diverse set of tasks that
probe both reasoning accuracy and computational efficiency.
Section 4.2 examines state-tracking, where Thinking States
exhibits stronger length generalization than CoT. Section 4.3
evaluates general reasoning on Multi-Hop QA and GSM8K,
showing that Thinking States surpasses latent reasoning
baselines and approaches CoT performance with significant
speedups. Section 4.4 presents ablation studies exploring the
performance–efficiency tradeoff as a function of recurrence
depth and chunk size. Finally, Section 4.5 provides an
interpretability-driven error analysis, identifying distinct
failure modes and cases where Thinking States outperforms
CoT.
4.1. Experimental Setup
All experiments useQwen2.5-Basemodels (Qwen et al.,
2024) (0.5B and 1.5B parameters), fine-tuned on task-
specific training data.
We compare against four baselines:
(i)CoT: fine-tuning on explicit chain-of-thought traces;
(ii) No CoT: standard fine-tuning to predict the final an-
swer directly;
(iii) iCoT(Deng et al., 2024): a latent reasoning method
that distills CoT into query representations via curricu-
lum learning;
(iv) Coconut(Hao et al., 2024): a state-of-the-art latent
reasoning method using continuous thought tokens.
We reproduce iCoT and Coconut results using the official
codebase of Hao et al. (2024) with default configurations
unless otherwise noted.
Metrics.We report accuracy on gold answers across all
tasks. For efficiency, we measure wall-clock speedup rel-
ative to CoT on a single A100-80GB GPU. Unlike prior
work (Hao et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2024), which reports ef-
ficiency in terms of generated token count, we use wall-time
because token generation with the lightweight Thinking
Block T is substantially faster than standard autoregressive
decoding.
4.2. State Tracking Tasks
State tracking tasks require monitoring quantities that evolve
throughout the input (Merrill et al., 2024; Kim & Schuster,
2023; Li et al., 2025). These tasks are a natural testbed
for latent reasoning methods because they explicitly require
sequential composition—each step depends on the result of
previous steps. We evaluate on two synthetic tasks adapted
from Anil et al. (2022):
• Parity: tracking a single binary state through a se-
quence of flip operations.
• Variable Assignment (Vars): tracking multiple inter-
acting integer variables, yielding more complex state
dynamics.
Both tasks are expressed in natural language; formal defini-
tions and examples are provided in Appendix A.4.
To assess whether the underlying base model truly learns to
reason via the recurrent thinking state mechanism, we em-
ploy a length generalization setting, drawing on the known
extrapolation capabilities of recurrent models (Del ´etang
et al., 2022). We fine-tune all methods, withQwen2.5-Base-
0.5Bas the base model, on sequences of up to N operations
(N∈ {10,20,40} ) and evaluate on lengths in [N,100] , in
both cases, sampled uniformly over the range. All mod-
5
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
Table 1.Performance (accuracy) on State Tracking tasks, trained
on samples with up to N state updates and evaluated on [N,100] .
Parity Vars
Method N=10 N=20 N=40 N=10 N=20 N=40
No CoT 54.67 57.50 59.60 02.15 02.17 02.19
CoT 12.35 38.12 64.38 06.78 35.45 87.75
Thinking States 98.37 99.02 100.00 33.76 87.23 97.71
Table 2.Performance and speedup (over CoT) on reasoning tasks
for different latent reasoning baselines and CoT.
GSM 2-HopFK2-HopPK
Method Acc↑Speedup↑Acc Speedup Acc Speedup
CoT 60.50×1 54.79×1 43.07×1
No CoT 34.11×5.59 33.47×1.89 31.92×2.03
Thinking States 42.22×2.66 54.91×1.19 43.05×1.23
Coconut 32.65×3.14 33.71×1.14 32.60×1.21
iCoT 34.00×5.71 28.84×1.59 36.31×1.80
els are trained to 100% in-distribution accuracy to strictly
isolate extrapolation capabilities from optimization effects.
Table 1 reports out-of-distribution (OOD) accuracy for each
training regime. The results demonstrate how a base LLM
trained with Thinking States effectively adapts to reasoning
with a recurrent mechanism, leading to stronger length gen-
eralization than that of a model reasoning via CoT. Critically,
this indicates that reasoning via the recurrent mechanism of-
fers a more effective solution than CoT, requiring a simpler
training distribution to achieve robust performance.
Furthermore, while CoT generates intermediate tokens pro-
portional to the number of state operations, considerably
extending the context length and thus expressivity, Think-
ing States maintains a static context size. By refining
the query representation through state updates, Thinking
States achieves superior length generalization, suggesting
the model has learned to reason through the recurrent mech-
anism.
4.3. General Reasoning Capabilities
We evaluate general reasoning capabilities on two estab-
lished benchmarks. First, a 2-hop QA dataset, where prior
work by Biran et al. (2024); Yang et al. (2024) demonstrated
standard LLMs exhibit latent reasoning to some extent, pro-
viding a useful test case for methods designed to improve
latent reasoning. Second, a GSM8K-style dataset, consist-
ing of ∼400K simple math word problems and parsed CoT
steps, previously used by Deng et al. (2023); Hao et al.
(2024). Methods in this section useQwen2.5-Base-1.5Bas
the base model.
For the 2-hop QA task, we consider two evaluation regimes.
InFull Knowledge (FK), the required factual knowledge
appears in the fine-tuning data, testing how well models
acquire and manipulate knowledge with each method. In
Parametric Knowledge (PK), examples are filtered to reflect
the knowledge of the base LLM, isolating whether a method
improves retrieval and manipulation of existing knowledge
in the base model.
Table 2 summarizes accuracy and speedups for each method.
Among latent-reasoning baselines, Thinking States consis-
tently achieves the highest accuracy across all tasks while
maintaining significant speedups compared to CoT. On both
variants of the 2-Hop task, Thinking States reaches similar
performance to CoT with improved efficiency, demonstrat-
ing a dramatic advantage over other non-CoT baselines,
with more than a 20% and 7% increase in accuracy on the
FKandPKvariants respectively.
On the GSM task, Thinking States demonstrates consid-
erably better performance compared to Coconut, No CoT
and iCoT, improving accuracy by ∼8% and maintaining a
considerable 2.66× speedup. The slight latency advantage
showcased by Coconut on this task leads us to evaluate if
performance can be improved at the cost of higher latency.
As reported in Appendix A.5.1, we observe that increasing
the number of latent steps leads to a modest improvement
in performance, even as latency approaches that of the CoT
model. In the next section, we provide several ablation stud-
ies over possible compute-efficiency tradeoffs with Thinking
States.
Finally, we analyze the training costs of Thinking States
compared to training with explicit recurrence and BPTT as
in Coconut. Figure 6, in Appendix A.5.3, plots the wall-
clock time per forward and backward pass as a function of
the number of recurrent steps/number of chunks in the input
sequence. The results demonstrate that while BPTT incurs
linearly increasing costs, Thinking States maintains close to
constant training time due to teacher forcing. Consequently,
while BPTT becomes prohibitively expensive to scale, incur-
ring a ∼10× cost penalty at just 10 steps, Thinking States
enables efficient training regardless of reasoning depth.
4.4. Ablation Study
To understand the architectural factors governing Thinking
States, we conduct two ablation studies over the GSM task.
We ablate the impact of recurrence with a deep to shallow
connection, by varying the layer to extract representations
passed to T , and the impact of reasoning frequency, by
varying the chunk size.
Impact of Deep to Shallow Connections:In Figure 3a,
we investigate the influence of deep to shallow recurrence
by varying the extraction layer for T , keeping injection
fixed at the first layer (as in previous experiments). Our
6
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
4 8 12 16 20 2426
Num Layers in Recurrence
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
Accuracy (%)
No CoT Baseline: 34.11%
3.12x 2.98x 2.97x2.86x2.78x2.72x2.66x
Speedup over CoT
(a)
2 4 8 16 32 48
Chunk Size
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
Accuracy (%)
No CoT Baseline: 34.11%
2.42x 2.57x 2.66x 2.74x 2.83x2.86x
Speedup over CoT (b)
Figure 3.Ablation studies over deep to shallow recurrence(a)and effects of the chunk size(b), with measured speedup over CoT (top)
at each point. In(a), performance increases with the number of layers used to process and generate states, pointing to the importance
of the deep to shallow design. In(b), increasing the chunk size leads to improved latency with peak performance for medium chunks,
highlighting the tradeoff between per-state capacity (large chunks) and reasoning frequency (small chunks).
purpose is to show the importance of the deep to shallow
recurrent principle, demonstrating that allocating more of
the model’s capacity when processing and generating states
leads to improved accuracy. Furthermore, this experiment
highlights the inherent accuracy-latency tradeoff: utilizing
fewer layers in the recurrent loop allows the remaining
layers to be executed only during query prefill, resulting
in higher speedups. For this analysis, we useQwen2.5-Base-
1.5B, which contains 28 hidden layers.
As shown in Figure 3a, performance increases monotoni-
cally with the number of layers included in the recurrence,
with a substantial accuracy gap of nearly 20% between the
shallowest and deepest configurations. This trend confirms
that maximizing the computational capacity available for
processing and generating thinking states is critical for per-
formance, effectively validating the deep-to-shallow design
choice.
Impact of Chunk Size:In Figure 3b, we study the effect
of varying the chunk size. The chunk size controls two im-
portant factors:(1)the computational capacity available for
state processing and generation(2)the number ofexpected
reasoning steps generated in each call to T . A small chunk
size limits available capacity for each state, and is expected
to generate less steps at each chunk. Conversely, larger
chunks provide larger capacity, but may lead to encoding
multiple sequential steps into single state. This latter sce-
nario undermines the deep-to-shallow recurrence, as consec-
utive steps generated within the same chunk cannot access
the full recurrent loop, relying instead on the LLMs depth
and limited capacity of the lightweight Thinking Block.
The tradeoff discussed above is evident in Figure 3b, when
the chunk size is small both performance and latency de-
grade, which can be explained by lack of computational
capacity and increased iterations during query processing.
As the chunk size increases, latency improves due to fewer
iterations during query processing. Increasing the chunk
size beyond a certain point (c= 8 ) eventually leads to re-
duced performance, which can be explained by the model
compressing too many reasoning steps into single updates.
Although performance decreases, we note that Thinking
States still maintains a notable gap in performance compared
to other latent reasoning methods even when approaching
similar speedups.
4.5. Error Analysis
We analyze the performance gap between Thinking States
and CoT on GSM-style problems. A key advantage
of Thinking States over other latent reasoning methods
is interpretability: because states are compressed from
natural-language thoughts, the model’s reasoning remains
inspectable.
Where Thinking States succeeds and CoT fails.Despite
the overall accuracy gap, approximately 12% of queries
correctly solved by Thinking States arenotsolved by CoT,
indicating that Thinking States mitigates certain CoT errors.
Figure 4 shows two representative examples: (1) CoT hallu-
cinates an additional reasoning step, and (2) CoT attempts
an overly complex intermediate computation. In both cases,
Thinking States produces a correct internal trajectory and
answer. We note that both models are fine-tuned from the
same base model and on identical data.
7
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
Example 1: Hallucinated Step
Derrick has a bakery that makes 10
dozen doughnuts every day,
[T: 10 *12=120] selling at $2 per
doughnut.[T: 120 *2=240] How much money
does Derrick make in June if he sells
all the doughnuts?[T: 240 *30=7200]The
answer is 7200
CoT Steps:10 *12=120 120 *2=240
240*30=72007200 *6=43200
Example 2: Over-Complex Computation
Jess is trying to guess the number of
blue jellybeans in a jar. She can see
that there are 17 green jelly beans and
twice as many red jelly beans.
The[T: 17 *2=34] rest of the jellybeans
are blue jelly beans. If there are a
total of 60 jelly beans in total,
[T: 17+34=51] how many blue jellybeans
are there?[T: 60-51=9]The answer is 9
CoT Steps:17 *2=3460-17-34=8
Figure 4.Examples where Thinking States succeeds but CoT fails.
Thinking States reasoning is shown in green. (1) CoT hallucinates
an extra step. (2) CoT attempts multiple operations in one step and
errs.
Where CoT succeeds and Thinking States fails: State
Ambiguity.We identify a distinct error pattern we term
state ambiguity: in many GSM queries, the quantity of inter-
est is specified only in the final clause and may be difficult
to anticipate earlier. As illustrated in Figure 5, this leads
Thinking States to reason about the wrong intermediate
quantity. Although the correct answer is often recoverable
via a simple transformation, such recovery requires exposure
to similar patterns during training.
We validate this hypothesis by prepending the final question
to the start of the prompt for all error cases. This zero-
shot intervention improves accuracy from 42.22 to 48.65,
despite the augmented queries being out-of-distribution. No-
tably, this limitation stems from the combination of Think-
ing States with a causal autoregressive backbone rather than
the thinking-state mechanism itself; bidirectional query pro-
cessing could, in principle, identify the relevant quantity
before committing to intermediate state updates.
5. Conclusions
In this work, we introduce Thinking States, a method that
enables reasoning while processing input tokens without
extending the model’s context. By relying on a recurrent
state representation of the thinking trajectory, the model
effectively conditions its token processing on intermediate
reasoning steps Empirically, this leads to improved perfor-
mance compared to other latent reasoning baselines while
maintaining a significant efficiency advantage over Chain-
(a) Original
Richard lives in a building with 15
floors. Each floor contains 8 units.
[T: 15×8=120.]Three quarters of the
units are occupied. [T: (3/4)×120=90.]
What’s the number of unoccupied units
on each floor?[T: 120-90=30.]
Answer:30
(b) Disambiguated
What’s the number of unoccupied units
on each floor?Richard lives in a
building with 15 floors. Each floor
contains 8 units. Three quarters of
the units are occupied.
[T: 0.75×8=6]What’s the number of
unoccupied units on each floor?
Answer:2
Figure 5.Illustration ofstate ambiguity. In (a), Thinking States
generates valid thoughts that are not aligned with the final clause
in the query, leading to an error. By adding the information to the
begining of the query, as in(b), the same model produces a correct
answer, without training on the new format.
of-Thought (CoT).
Furthermore, a key contribution of our approach is the spe-
cialized data construction process that maps reasoning steps
to specific input chunks. This formulation ensures that
the recurrent process does not optimize with BPTT during
training. Instead, training is fully parallelizable via teacher
forcing, leading to a substantial reduction in computational
cost compared to prior recurrent methods.
Our framework opens several avenues for future research.
First, while we currently target query prefill, extending
Thinking States to the decoding phase could enable allo-
cating dynamic compute during token generation. Second,
while our current approach relies on Supervised Fine-Tuning
over existing CoT data, this model can serve as an effec-
tive ”warm-start” initialization for Reinforcement Learn-
ing. Starting from a model that has already learned to com-
press reasoning into latent states could stabilize RL training,
allowing the model to subsequently optimize its internal
thinking process beyond the constraints of human-generated
traces.
Impact Statement
This paper presents a method for improving the efficiency
of reasoning in large language models. By reducing compu-
tational costs relative to chain-of-thought approaches, our
work may contribute to lowering the energy consumption
and environmental footprint of deploying reasoning-capable
language models. Additionally, because our method gener-
ates interpretable natural-language thoughts, it may support
efforts toward more transparent and auditable AI systems.
8
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
We do not foresee unique ethical concerns beyond those
broadly associated with advances in language model capa-
bilities.
References
Anil, C., Wu, Y ., Andreassen, A., Lewkowycz, A., Misra,
V ., Ramasesh, V ., Slone, A., Gur-Ari, G., Dyer, E., and
Neyshabur, B. Exploring length generalization in large
language models.ArXiv preprint, abs/2207.04901, 2022.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2207.04901.
Biran, E., Gottesman, D., Yang, S., Geva, M., and
Globerson, A. Hopping too late: Exploring the limi-
tations of large language models on multi-hop queries.
ArXiv preprint, abs/2406.12775, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2406.12775.
Comanici, G., Bieber, E., Schaekermann, M., Pasupat, I.,
Sachdeva, N., Dhillon, I., Blistein, M., Ram, O., Zhang,
D., Rosen, E., et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier
with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context,
and next generation agentic capabilities.ArXiv preprint,
abs/2507.06261, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2507.06261.
Dehghani, M., Gouws, S., Vinyals, O., Uszkoreit, J., and
Kaiser, L. Universal transformers. In7th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019,
New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net,
2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=HyzdRiR9Y7.
Del´etang, G., Ruoss, A., Grau-Moya, J., Genewein, T., Wen-
liang, L. K., Catt, E., Cundy, C., Hutter, M., Legg, S., Ve-
ness, J., and Ortega, P. A. Neural networks and the chom-
sky hierarchy.ArXiv preprint, abs/2207.02098, 2022.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2207.02098.
Deng, Y ., Prasad, K., Fernandez, R., Smolensky, P., Chaud-
hary, V ., and Shieber, S. Implicit chain of thought
reasoning via knowledge distillation.ArXiv preprint,
abs/2311.01460, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2311.01460.
Deng, Y ., Choi, Y ., and Shieber, S. From explicit cot to
implicit cot: Learning to internalize cot step by step.
ArXiv preprint, abs/2405.14838, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2405.14838.
Geiping, J., McLeish, S., Jain, N., Kirchenbauer, J., Singh,
S., Bartoldson, B. R., Kailkhura, B., Bhatele, A., and
Goldstein, T. Scaling up test-time compute with latent
reasoning: A recurrent depth approach.ArXiv preprint,
abs/2502.05171, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2502.05171.
Goyal, S., Ji, Z., Rawat, A. S., Menon, A. K., Kumar,
S., and Nagarajan, V . Think before you speak: Train-
ing language models with pause tokens.ArXiv preprint,
abs/2310.02226, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2310.02226.
Hao, S., Sukhbaatar, S., Su, D., Li, X., Hu, Z., Weston,
J., and Tian, Y . Training large language models to
reason in a continuous latent space.ArXiv preprint,
abs/2412.06769, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2412.06769.
Hassid, M., Synnaeve, G., Adi, Y ., and Schwartz, R. Don’t
overthink it. preferring shorter thinking chains for im-
proved llm reasoning.ArXiv preprint, abs/2505.17813,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.
17813.
Kang, Y ., Sun, X., Chen, L., and Zou, W. C3ot: Generat-
ing shorter chain-of-thought without compromising ef-
fectiveness.ArXiv preprint, abs/2412.11664, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11664.
Kaplan, G., Oren, M., Reif, Y ., and Schwartz, R. From
tokens to words: On the inner lexicon of llms.ArXiv
preprint, abs/2410.05864, 2024. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2410.05864.
Kim, N. and Schuster, S. Entity tracking in language models.
ArXiv preprint, abs/2305.02363, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2305.02363.
Li, B. Z., Guo, Z. C., and Andreas, J. (how) do language
models track state?ArXiv preprint, abs/2503.02854,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.
02854.
Merrill, W., Petty, J., and Sabharwal, A. The illusion of
state in state-space models. InProceedings of the 41st In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’24.
JMLR.org, 2024.
Qwen, :, Yang, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B.,
Yu, B., Li, C., Liu, D., Huang, F., Wei, H., Lin, H., Yang,
J., Tu, J., Zhang, J., Yang, J., Yang, J., Zhou, J., Lin, J.,
Dang, K., Lu, K., Bao, K., Yang, K., Yu, L., Li, M., Xue,
M., Zhang, P., Zhu, Q., Men, R., Lin, R., Li, T., Tang,
T., Xia, T., Ren, X., Ren, X., Fan, Y ., Su, Y ., Zhang, Y .,
Wan, Y ., Liu, Y ., Cui, Z., Zhang, Z., and Qiu, Z. Qwen2.5
technical report.ArXiv preprint, abs/2412.15115, 2024.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115.
Shen, Z., Yan, H., Zhang, L., Hu, Z., Du, Y ., and He, Y . Codi:
Compressing chain-of-thought into continuous space via
self-distillation.ArXiv preprint, abs/2502.21074, 2025.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2502.21074.
9
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Ichter,
B., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q., and Zhou, D. Chain-of-
thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
models.ArXiv preprint, abs/2201.11903, 2022. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.
Xia, H., Leong, C. T., Wang, W., Li, Y ., and Li, W. To-
kenskip: Controllable chain-of-thought compression in
llms.ArXiv preprint, abs/2502.12067, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12067.
Yang, S., Kassner, N., Gribovskaya, E., Riedel, S., and Geva,
M. Do large language models perform latent multi-hop
reasoning without exploiting shortcuts?ArXiv preprint,
abs/2411.16679, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2411.16679.
Zelikman, E., Harik, G., Shao, Y ., Jayasiri, V ., Haber, N.,
and Goodman, N. D. Quiet-star: Language models can
teach themselves to think before speaking.ArXiv preprint,
abs/2403.09629, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2403.09629.
A. Method - Additional Details
A.1. Architecture
We provide additional details on the thinking and compres-
sion blocks, T and C and their integration with the base
LLM, Mθ. In all reported experiments, except when explic-
itly stated in section 4.4, we set the injection and extraction
layer, Lin, Lout, to be after the first layer (excluding the
token embedding layer) and after the second-to-last layer
respectively.
Both T and C share the same underlying core module, a
causal Transformer block, sharing configurations and hyper-
parameters (i.e., hidden size, number of attention heads,
sliding/dense attention etc.) as the layers in Mθ. In our ex-
periments, Mθ follows the architecture ofQwen2.5models,
with model sizes listed in the main text. As the thinking
head,T, is used for auto-regressive generation of language
tokens, and is expected to return token embeddings, it addi-
tionally includes an unembedding and embedding layer.
This architecture facilitates the function of the thinking head
and compression head as follows. At inference time, T pro-
duces thoughts in natural-language through autoregressive
generation, initially conditioned on the chunk of hidden
representations Hout
i ∈R c×d, where c, d denote the chunk
size and the hidden size of Mθ. Each token predicted by
T is passed through the embedding layer, and the resulting
embedding is appended to the context of T . This results in a
distribution mismatch, as Hout
i (extracted from a deep layer)
share the context with standard token embeddings. However,
we observe that this does not lead to a significant limitations
when the block is finetuned for next-token-prediction in the
same setup, even with relatively little data as in 2-HopPK
For C, to use the causal Transformer as a compression mod-
ule, we apply a single parallel forward pass to all input
token embeddings using a causal attention mask (though
bidirectional attention is also valid) to obtain a contextualize
representations. We then extract the last c representations to
serve as the state Si injected to the next chunk, appending
padding tokens to the input sequence if it is shorter than
c. Through finetuning,Clearns to compress relevant infor-
mation into future positions. We also experimented with
appending a set of learnable queries appended to the query
to make the compression explicit, however, this approach
performed worse in practice.
To initialize the parameters of the two modules, we utilize
existing components from Mθ. Namely, the Transformer
block in T is initialized as an independent copy of thelast
layer of Mθ, while C is initialized as an independent copy
of thefirstlayer (excluding the token embedding layer).
The unembedding layer in T is initialized as an independent
copy of the unembedding layer of Mθ while the embedding
layer is shared withM θ (i.e., is not an independent copy).
10
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
For T , the motivation is to leverage parameters already
trained to convert hidden representations into token pre-
dictions. For C, the motivation is to leverage parameters
trained to contextualize token embeddings (Kaplan et al.,
2024) and generate a state sharing a latent space with the
injection layer, which immediately follows the first layer.
A.2. Fast Prefill with Speculated Thinking
We provide a more detailed description of the fast prefill
algorithm detailed in Section 3.3 in algorithm 13. The idea
is using the sparsity of non-trivial states, generated by more
than an <EOS>, to a few allow parallel execution instead
of iteratively processing all chunks in the query. This is
achieved by always speculating future states are trivial, ap-
plying a parallel pass conditioned on the speculation, then
correcting for the first location where the assumption breaks
and repeating.
This process is guaranteed to terminate in exactly |R|+ 1
iterations, where |R| is the number of non-trivial states gen-
erated, which is unknown in advance. As each iteration after
the first implies exactly one non-trivial state was generated,
this leads to exactly|R|+ 1rounds.
In algorithm 1, we explicitly denote that Mθ returns a set of
hidden representations H from all layers, only then extract-
ing the target representation Hout
i to emphasize all repre-
sentations are stored in the cache. Additionally, for ease of
presentation, the algorithm omits the fact that when finished,
the representation of the last position in the input is used to
generate the next token, as is in standard decoding.
A.3. Constructing Chunk-Level Supervision
As mentioned in the main text, Section 3.4, chunk level
supervision for the Thinking Block is obtained by mapping
reasoning steps to specific positions in the input query. The
mapping is realized by placing special indicator tokens in
the query text.
Once the query is tokenized, the special tokens allow us
to construct a matching reasoning array sharing the same
length. At every position in the query containing an indica-
tor token, we insert the matching reasoning sequence to the
same position in the reasoning array. In the vast majority
of cases, the desired supervision is obtained by shifting the
reasoning array one position to the left, then removing all
entries containing a special token in the query sequence,
from the query tokens and the reasoning array.
A small number of cases contain multiple consecutive indi-
cator tokens that are placed in succession. In these cases,
we assign the matching steps in order, starting from the
3Full version can be reviewed in our codebase, which we plan
to fully release
Algorithm 1Fast Speculative Prefill
Input:Query chunks X1...K, Backbone Mθ, Thinking
BlockT ϕ, CompressionC ϕ, Chunk Sizec
t= 0
kv=init cache()
Si = ˆ0∈R c×d i∈[0, . . . , K−1]{ Speculate
thoughts}
S=concat([S 1, . . . ,Sk])
X=concat([X 1, . . . ,Xk])
f inished=f alse
whilenot f inisheddo
˜X=S+X
H=M θ( ˜X, past kv=kv)
H out =extract(H, L out)
Hout
i =chunk(H out, c)i∈[t, . . . , K]
Si+1 =C ϕ2 (Tϕ1 (Hout
i ))
t=f ind f irst true(Si ̸= ˆ0)
iftisN onethen
f inished=true
kv.cache(H, max index=N one)
else
kv.cache(H, max index=t)
S=concat([S t, ˆ0, . . . ,ˆ0])
X=concat([X t,X t+1, . . . ,Xk])
end if
end while
returnkv,S −1
first token positionprecedingthe first indicator. In case the
reasoning steps”overflow”the token sequence length, these
steps are concatenated together with a special separator to-
ken.
A.4. State Tracking Tasks
We provide the definitions for the state tracking tasks used
for evaluation in Section 4.2,”Parity”and”Variable As-
signment”(abbreviated to”Vars”).
Parity:The parity task acts as a natural language version
of the standard parity prediction problem over binary se-
quences, which is commonly used when evaluating extrapo-
lation capabilities in various architectures (Dehghani et al.,
2019; Anil et al., 2022; Del ´etang et al., 2022). Over bi-
nary sequences, e.g., s= 00101011 , the task is predicting
sum(s) mod 2 . To represent the task in natural language,
we transform the binary sequence into a query describing
operations applied to a coin by two entities. When pro-
viding supervision to T , the indicator token mentioned in
Section 3.4 is placed after each operation, paired with the
current state.
Anabbreviatedquery is provided in Figure 2a and a full
query, equivalent to the binary sequence s= 1011 , is given
11
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
here, along with indicator tokens and the matching labels:
”The coin starts at state heads.<T> Alice doesn’t
flip the coin. <T> Bob flips the coin. <T> Alice
flips the coin.<T> The final state of the coin is
heads.”
Reasoning Targets: [”heads<eos>”,
”heads<eos>”, ”tails <eos>”, ”heads <eos>”]
Where <T> denotes the indicator token and blue denotes
text that converted into target tokens for predictions. In
this formulation, increasing the number of state operations
directly translates to longer binary sequences, i.e., more
operations applied to the coin.
Variable Assignment (Vars):This task extends the state
tracking setting to multiple integer-valued variables whose
updates may depend on one another, requiring complex state
updates (Anil et al., 2022). Unlike Parity, which tracks a
single binary state, Vars requires maintaining the values
of multiple variables (e.g., a, b, c) and executing arithmetic
operations (e.g., b=b+a ) that reference the current state
of other variables.
The task is represented in natural language as a sequence
of assignment operations. To generate supervision for T ,
similar to the Parity task, we insert the indicator token <T>
after each operation paired with the value of the updated
variable.
An example query, equivalent to the provided raw input, is
formatted below with indicator tokens and the correspond-
ing reasoning targets (derived using modular arithmetic con-
sistent with the final values):
”Track the variables values: a=1; b=2 a=a+b<T>
b=b+a<T>b=b+3<T>Final values: a=3 b=8”
Reasoning Targets: [”a=3<eos>”,
”b=5<eos>”, ”b=8<eos>”]
A.5. General Reasoning Capabilities
A.5.1. COCONUT- ADDITIONALRESULTS
As mentioned in the main paper, we scale computation
with Coconut by increasing the number of latent thinking
tokens. This is achieved by increasing the number of latent
tokens introduced in each round of the curriculum, out of 3
rounds in total, excluding the initial phase training the CoT
checkpoint used for initialization. As is evident in Table 3
The experiment in the main paper uses 2 thinking tokens
per round,6in total.
A.5.2. DATACONSTRUCTION FORGSM
As mentioned in the introduction, for the GSM task, we rely
on a strong teacher model (Gemini-2.5 Flash (Comanici
Table 3.Coconut (Hao et al., 2024) performance and speedup as
computation increases, by increasing the number of latent steps.
Num. Latents Acc Speedup
6 32.65 3.14×
9 33.48 2.53×
12 31.29 2.08×
15 32.35 1.77×
21 32.65 1.38×
et al., 2025)) to transform existing parsed CoT data into the
mapping used to supervise the thinking head. We achieve
this by prompting the teacher model with a prompt similar to
the one presented in Figure 7, removing two of the in context
examples for readability. Using the structured output, we are
able to extract the transformed query and matching thinking
steps. To validate the process, we only include samples
whose queries and thinking steps provide an exact string
match to the source query and thinking steps, once the
indicator tokens <THINK> are removed, discarding any
samples that result in a mismatch. After validation we are
left with375,101/385,620samples, or97.2%.
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Number of Chunks / Latents
10 1
100
Time (s)
Coconut
Thinking States
Forward
Backward
Figure 6.Training Cost AnalysisComparison of wall-clock
time for forward and backward passes on a fixed-length input
(L= 128 ) as a function of the number of recurrent steps (chunks).
Methods relying on BPTT demonstrate linear scaling in time,
circumvented by teacher forcing in Thinking States despite the
added dimensionality and computational overhead ofT.
A.5.3. TRAININGCOMPUTE
We quantify the computational advantage of training Think-
ing States with teacher forcing compared to latent reason-
ing methods that rely on Backpropagation Through Time
(BPTT), such as Coconut. Figure 6 illustrates the wall-clock
12
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
time required for a single forward and backward pass on
a fixed-length sequence, as a function of the number of
recurrent steps (Coconut) or number of chunks 4 (Think-
ing States), by controlling the chunk size relative to the
sequence length. We use a batch size of 1 and a sequence
length of 128 tokens.
As shown in Figure 6, training with BPTT exhibits a linear
increase in wall-time for both forward and backward passes
as the number of latent steps grows. In contrast, Thinking
States maintains close to constant training time regardless
of the number of chunks, as the availability of ground-truth
states allows for fully parallelized computation. The small
variation in wall-time for Thinking States is explained by the
additional dimensionality of decoding reasoningsequence
from fixed-size token chunks. Yet, as visible in the figure,
these variations are small compared to the increase in cost
due to BPTT.
4Here the chunk size accordingly, we note that k chunks imply
krecurrent steps at inference time.
13
Latent Reasoning with Supervised Thinking States
Prompt for GSM Data Generation
You are an expert in computational linguistics. Your task is to augment a given
query with thinking markers (<THINK>) based on a provided reasoning trace. This
involves identifying the precise locations in the text where specific calculations
can be performed.
Task Instructions:1.Analyze Inputs:You will receive two inputs:
•A Query: A question or word problem.
•A Reasoning Trace: An ordered list of strings, where each string is a distinct
mathematical calculation required to solve the query.
2.Produce Two Outputs:
•query: This is the original Query text, but with the special token <THINK>
inserted at specific locations.
•thinking: This is the ordered list of calculations.
3.Rules for <THINK> Placement:
•The number of <THINK> tokens inserted into the query must be exactly equal to
the number of calculations in the Reasoning Trace.
•The order of the <THINK> tokens in the query must correspond one-to-one with the
order of the calculations in the Reasoning Trace.
•For each calculation, you must insert its corresponding <THINK> token at the
earliest possible locationin the query. This location is defined as the
point immediately after the word or phrase that provides the final piece of
information needed to perform that specific calculation.
4.Rule for the thinking List:
•The thinking output list is simply a direct copy of the ordered list of
calculations provided in the Input Reasoning Trace.
5.Output Format:
•The output should be provided as a python dictionary with two keys: query and
thinking.
•The values should be wrapped in <<>> to support easy parsing.
•Example:
{
"query": "<<Your modified query here>>",
"thinking": <<[’<<calculation1>>’, ’<<calculation2>>’, ...]>>
}
Examples
Example 1:
•Input Query:’Hannah has three dogs. The first dog eats 1.5 cups of dog food a
day. The second dog eats twice as much while the third dog eats 2.5 cups more than
the second dog. How many cups of dog food should Hannah prepare in a day for her
three dogs?’
•Input Reasoning Trace:[’<<1.5 *2=3>>’, ’<<3+2.5=5.5>>’, ’<<1.5+3+5.5=10>>’]
Required Output:
{
"query": <<’Hannah has three dogs. The first dog eats 1.5 cups of dog food a day.
The second dog eats twice as much<THINK> while the third dog eats 2.5 cups more than
the second dog.<THINK> How many cups of dog food should Hannah prepare in a day for
her three dogs?<THINK> ’>>,
"thinking": <<[’<<1.5 *2=3>>’, ’<<3+2.5=5.5>>’, ’<<1.5+3+5.5=10>>’]>>
}
TaskNow, perform this transformation for the following input and return your output as a
python dictionary.
Query:
<<QUERY>>
Reasoning Trace:
<<REASONING TRACE>>Produce your output as a python dictionary in the specified format below:
{
"query": <<ADD YOUR OUTPUT HERE>>,
"thinking": <<ADD YOUR OUTPUT HERE>>
}
Figure 7.The abbreviated version of few-shot prompt used to generate the alignment data. The prompt instructs the model to act as a
computational linguist and inject <THINK> tokens into the query corresponding to specific reasoning steps. The full prompt used is
identical except for containing 2 additional in-context examples, similar to the example provided.
14
