TOWARDSAGENTICSELF-LEARNINGLLMS
INSEARCHENVIRONMENT
Wangtao Sun1,2, Xiang Cheng3, Jialin Fan6, Xing Yu3,
Yao Xu1,2,Shizhu He 1,2,Jun Zhao 1,2,Kang Liu 1,2,5∗
1The Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3Xiaohongshu Inc 4Meituan Inc 5Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
6Tsinghua University
ABSTRACT
We study whether self-learning can scale LLM-based agents without relying on
human-curated datasets or predefined rule-based rewards. Through controlled
experiments in a search-agent setting, we identify two key determinants of scalable
agent training: the source of reward signals and the scale of agent task data. We find
that rewards from a Generative Reward Model (GRM) outperform rigid rule-based
signals for open-domain learning, and that co-evolving the GRM with the policy
further boosts performance. Increasing the volume of agent task data—even when
synthetically generated—substantially enhances agentic capabilities. Building on
these insights, we proposeAgentic Self-Learning(ASL), a fully closed-loop,
multi-role reinforcement learning framework that unifies task generation, policy
execution, and evaluation within a shared tool environment and LLM backbone.
ASL coordinates a Prompt Generator, a Policy Model, and a Generative Reward
Model to form a virtuous cycle of harder task setting, sharper verification, and
stronger solving. Empirically, ASL delivers steady, round-over-round gains, sur-
passes strong RLVR baselines (e.g., Search-R1) that plateau or degrade, and
continues improving under zero-labeled-data conditions, indicating superior sam-
ple efficiency and robustness. We further show that GRM verification capacity
is the main bottleneck: if frozen, it induces reward hacking and stalls progress;
continual GRM training on the evolving data distribution mitigates this, and a
small late-stage injection of real verification data raises the performance ceiling.
This work establishes reward source and data scale as critical levers for open-
domain agent learning and demonstrates the efficacy of multi-role co-evolution for
scalable, self-improving agents. The data and code of this paper are released at
https://github.com/forangel2014/Towards-Agentic-Self-Learning
1 INTRODUCTION
Autonomous agents built on Large Language Models (LLMs) have evolved rapidly, from early prompt-
engineering pipelines to recent reinforcement learning–trained systems capable of self-improvement
in interactive environments. Early work such as ReAct-style reasoning–acting frameworks and
reflective methods constructed agent loops through manually designed prompt templates, memory
modules, and decision-making heuristics Shinn et al.; Yao et al. (2022); Sun et al. (2023). These
policy-evolution approaches refine the agent’s reasoning process via self-reflection, co-adaptation, or
prompt rewriting, and can effectively integrate with other inference-time enhancing technique such
as Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG).
A second wave of research extends the RL with Verifiers and Rewards (RLVR) paradigm, pioneered
in reasoning-focused models such as OpenAI o1 Jaech et al. (2024) and DeepSeek-R1 Guo et al.
(2025), to the agent setting. Works like WebAgent-R1 Wei et al., Search-R1 Jin et al. (2025) and
R1-Searcher Song et al. (2025) train LLM-based agents end-to-end with reinforcement learning in
∗Corresponding author: kliu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
1
arXiv:2510.14253v2  [cs.AI]  21 Oct 2025
interactive environments through rule-based reward signals, enabling them to continuously refine
planning, tool use, and long-horizon strategies without relying solely on static instruction-tuned
datasets.
In parallel, there has been a growing trend towardself-learning Large Reasoning Models (LRMs),
which aim to improve reasoning ability through reinforcement learning, but without relying on large
quantities of annotated human data. Within this paradigm, methods such as Absolute-Zero Zhao et al.
and R-Zero Huang et al. can achieve self-evolution LRMs under zero-labeled-data conditions.
However, most existing approaches still rely heavily on human-annotated datasets or rule-based
environments (e.g., code interpreters) to provide verifiable rewards within the RLVR paradigm. Such
dependence significantly constrains the potential of LLM agents to scale the self-learning paradigm to
open-domain settings, where reliable, automatically verifiable feedback is scarce and task structures
are less formalized.
Motivated by these developments, we seek to explore whether the self-learning paradigm can be
effectively extended to scale the training of agentic systems,freeing them from reliance on both
human-curated datasets and predefined rule-based reward functions. To this end, we begin by
conducting controlled experiments in thesearch-agentsetting introduced by SEARCH-R1 Jin et al.
(2025), in order to investigate two key factors for LLM-based agentic reinforcement learning: the
source of reward signals(§3.1) and thescale of agent task data(§3.1). Our findings reveal that:
• Compared to rigid, rule-based rewards, signals produced by aGenerative Reward Model(GRM) are
more effective for scaling LLM agents to open-domain scenarios. Moreover, when the GRM is co-
evolved with the policy model, thereby progressively acquiring stronger generative discrimination
capabilities, agent performance improves further.
• Increasing the quantity of agent task data — even when tasks are synthetically generated — can
substantially enhance LLMs’ agentic capabilities.
Meta Prompt
 Prompt
Generator
Policy
Model
Reward
Model
Tools
 Prompt
Generator
Policy
Model
Reward
Model
Tools
Evolving
provides meta prompts provides specified tasks provides rewards
 interacts with environment
Evolved
Meta Prompt
Figure 1: The framework of Agentic Self-Learning (ASL).
Based on these observations, we present Agentic Self-Learning (ASL) — a fully closed-loop, multi-
role reinforcement learning framework that unifies task generation, policy execution, and evaluation
within a shared tool environment and LLM backbone. ASL is built upon three mutually reinforcing
functional roles: thePrompt Generator, thePolicy Model, and theGenerative Reward Model.
Through iterative optimization of these three roles, ASL embodies an agentic, self-improving loop:
generating diverse and adaptively challenging tasks, solving them, and refining evaluation criteria in
tandem. This design not only mitigates the need for external supervision but also enables scalable,
open-domain learning that is robust against reward hacking.
To empirically evaluate the efficacy of PURM, we conduct a series of experiments to answer the
following three questions:
Can ASL effectively train the LLM agent compared to existing methods?ASL delivers steady,
iteration-over-iteration gains and ultimately surpasses strong RLVR method such as Search-r1, which
excels early but quickly plateaus and degrades. Other self-learning methods (e.g., Absolute Zero,
2
R-zero) also show early gains followed by stagnation. In contrast, ASL continues improving even
under zero-data conditions, highlighting its superior sample efficiency and robustness.
Does the three roles in ASL co-evolve during the training process?We observe a clear closed-loop
synergy: the Prompt Generator produces progressively harder questions, the Generative Reward
Model improves its verification accuracy each round, and the Policy Model steadily increases
task accuracy. This virtuous cycle—harder question-setting, sharper verification, and stronger
solving—confirms coordinated co-evolution.
What factors might limit the ongoing evolution of ASL and how can we mitigate them?The
main bottleneck is the GRM’s verification capacity. When the GRM is not updated, the Prompt
Generator learns to exploit scoring blind spots, triggering reward hacking and stalling Policy Model
progress. Continual GRM training on the evolving distribution mitigates this failure mode and
sustains improvement over longer horizons. Moreover, injecting a small amount of real verification
data further lifts the performance ceiling, indicating that ASL’s upper bound is effectively set by GRM
capability. Practically, a two-phase strategy works well: rely on self-generated data to continually
calibrate the GRM, then apply a modest real-data calibration late in training to refresh the ceiling and
unlock additional gains.
In summary, this paper makes the following foundational contributions:
• Through controlled experiments, we identify thesource of reward signalsand thescale of agent
task dataas two critical factors for scaling LLM agents in open-domain settings.
• We propose ASL, the first multi-role closed-loop agentic self-learning framework, enabling simul-
taneous co-evolution of task generation, problem solving, and evaluation.
• Through experiments, we demonstrated that ASL can effectively coordinate the improvement
of problem generation, solving, and verification capabilities over multiple rounds of iteration;
meanwhile, our validation results revealed that the capability boundary of GRM is an important
factor limiting the upper bound of ASL, and we further proved that this upper bound can be raised
by training GRM with either synthetic or real data.
2 RELATEDWORK
Policy Evolution.Currently, the development of self-evolving agents focuses primarily on two
key aspects. One area emphasizes the innovation of internal learning mechanisms to drive agent
evolution. This aspect is centered on optimizing the agent’s internal learning, decision-making,
and adaptation processes, typically without relying on structured adjustments to the external task
environment. For instance, Reflexion Shinn et al. introduces a natural language feedback mechanism
that replaces traditional weight updates, enhancing decision-making capabilities through error-driven
self-reflection memory. Mutual-Taught Shi et al. (b) employs the Expectation-Maximization (EM)
algorithm to jointly optimize the policy model and reward model, allowing for collaborative adaptation
to distribution shifts. AgentEvolver Belle et al. adopts a multi-role collaboration mechanism, which
enables agents to rewrite prompts and decision codes independently without human intervention and
further promotes the autonomous optimization of internal mechanisms. The essence of these methods
lies in improving the agent’s abilities through enhancements in internal training algorithms, feedback
mechanisms, or data generation strategies.
Task Adaptation.Another research focus is the dynamic evolution of task difficulty and structure.
A meticulously designed task environment serves as a powerful driving force for evolution (Gao
et al.). AlphaEvolve Novikov et al. proposes an evolutionary code generation framework that
utilizes multi-round collaboration among large language models (LLMs) and difficulty cascading
to optimize algorithm design while the Self-Challenging Agent (SCA) Zhou et al. introduces a
"code-as-task" framework that achieves a leap in tool invocation capabilities through the generation
of self-verifiable tasks. TaskCraft Shi et al. (a) is dedicated to the automatic generation of complex
multi-tool combination tasks, systematically honing the reasoning and planning abilities of the
agents. While these methods have demonstrated significant effectiveness in structured tasks and
coding, they often fall short in addressing complex semantic understanding and judgment scenarios
in open-domain question-answering texts. To bridge this gap, our work presents a self-evolving agent
oriented toward question-answering texts, with the core innovation of using distribution entropy as
3
both a measure of difficulty and an evolution reward signal, thereby constructing a closed-loop task
evolution engine.
Agent-R1.Traditional large language models (LLMs) rely on human-designed workflows. In
contrast, end-to-end reinforcement learning (RL) methods empower agents to autonomously make
decisions and perform actions by learning optimal policies through interactions with dynamic online
environments. WebAgent-R1 Wei et al. implements multi-round interactive end-to-end optimization
to support scalable online interactive learning within complex network environments. NB-Agent
Zhang et al. integrates a code-driven interaction paradigm with distributed reinforcement learning
training, and further introduces sandbox-based acceleration techniques and memory optimization
strategies to achieve efficient large-scale online training. Furthermore, Absolute Zero Zhao et al.
and R-Zero Huang et al., which leverage Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR),
generate and solve tasks respectively through self-play mechanisms and two-role adversarial evolution,
breaking through the dependence on human-labeled data and promoting the self-evolution. The
deep integration of reinforcement learning with intelligent agents opens up new possibilities for the
autonomous completion of long-term and complex tasks.
3 AGENTICSELF-LEARNING
We proposeAgentic Self-Learning(ASL), a multi-agent self-improvement framework designed
to enable large language models (LLMs) to continuously evolve their reasoning, generation, and
evaluation capabilities in an autonomous closed loop. We first introduce two key factors we have
identified that influence RL training for LLM agents: the scale of agent task data and the source of
reward signals (§3.1). We then present the three key components of the ASL framework—the prompt
generator, the policy model, and the reward model (§3.2), and finally describe the training procedure
of the ASL framework (§3.3).
3.1 EMPIRICALMOTIVATION FORASL DESIGN
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
Steps
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40T est Accuracy
Rule-based Reward
Fixed Generative Reward Model
Policy as Reward Model
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
Figure 2: Performance comparison between rule-
based, fixed GRM, and policy-shared GRM reward
functions. A co-evolving GRM yields the best re-
ward quality and downstream policy performance.
Before finalizing the ASL architecture, we con-
ducted two preliminary studies to investigate
key design choices in agentic RL with verifiable
rewards, which directly motivate our proposed
multi-role closed-loop framework. Following
the settings in Search-R1 (later introduced in
§4.1), we select Qwen-2.5-7B-instruct as the
base model and train and test the policy mod-
els in search-based question-answering environ-
ment. We first conducted the following two
controlled experiments to identify thesource of
reward signals(§3.1) and thescale of agent task
data(§3.1) as two critical factors for scaling
LLM agents in open-domain settings.
(1) The Source of Reward Signals.In
RLAIF-style settings, the choice of reward func-
tion critically influences policy optimization.
We compared the following three variants:
•Rule-based Reward: answers are judged using substring exact match with gold answers.
• Fixed Generative Reward Model: the base policy model (reference model) acts as a agentic judge
producing rewards.
• Policy as Reward Model: the generative reward model shares parameters with the policy model
so the generative reward model can generalize from improvements in the policy model’s agent
capabilities to achieve stronger agentic verification ability.
As shown in Figure 2, both generative reward settings outperform purely rule-based rewards, confirm-
ing that a generative judge can provide more informative and tolerant reward signals. Furthermore, the
4
GRM sharing parameters with the policy model achieves the highest and keeping growing accuracy,
suggesting that generative reward models with stronger agentic verification ability are even better
reward functions for LLM agentic RL. This empirical evidence underpins our decision to include a
trainable policy-shared GRM as a core role in ASL.
(2) The Scaling of Agentic Data.We next investigated whether scaling the amount ofagent-
generatedtraining data benefits policy learning when using a GRM as the reward function. Starting
from the same meta prompts (Appendix A), we generate varying quantities of search-based QA tasks
(1k, 10k and 46k examples) and accordingly train the LLM agent on them.
Results in Figure 3 show a consistent improvement with increased generated data volume. This
finding motivates ASL’s closed-loop Prompt Generator design — by autonomously producing high-
quality, diverse tasks at scale, ASL continuously supplies the policy with valuable new training data
without human annotation cost.
These two findings jointly justify the ASL multi-role design: (1) a co-evolving GRM is superior to
fixed or rule-based rewards, and (2) enabling the agent to scale high-quality, verifiably judged tasks is
a viable path to sustained performance growth.
3.2 CONSTITUENTROLES
0 500 1000 1500 2000
Steps
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40T est Accuracy
With 169k Real Data
With 46k Generated Data
With 10k Generated Data
With 1k Generated Data
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
Figure 3: Effect of scaling the amount of
GRM-rewarded agentic data on downstream ac-
curacy. Larger amounts of verifiably judged agent-
generated data substantially improve policy perfor-
mance.
Prompt Generator.Conditioned on ameta
prompt, the Prompt Generator is responsible
for producing new training tasks in the form
of problem–solution pairs (x, a), where x de-
notes the synthesized question and a denotes its
reference or ground-truth answer. In addition
to producing initial tasks, the Prompt Genera-
tor evolves the task distribution over iterations,
thereby adaptively increasing task complexity
to match the model’s learned capabilities.
Policy Model.Given a task x, the Policy
Model generates a candidate solution y. This
role essentially models the problem-solving ca-
pability of the system and is the primary target
for performance improvement. Its outputs are
subsequently evaluated by the Generative Re-
ward Model to obtain scalar feedback signals.
Generative Reward Model.Provided with a problem x and a generated solution y, the Generative
Reward Model produces a correctness score s∈ {0,1} . The generative reward model itself is also
trained via RL to improve its ability to faithfully and consistently assess outputs.
3.3 TRAININGPROCESS
ASL operates in an iterative cycle that progresses through RL training the three roles in sequence:
Prompt Generator→Generative Reward Model→Policy Model→Prompt Generator. . . . At
each stage, one role is actively optimized while the others provide fixed contextual behavior within
the loop. Assuming we are at thetth iteration:
Phase 1: Prompt Generator Training.Given a meta prompt u from Prompt Generator training
data D(t−1)
P G that is constructed in t−1 iteration, the Prompt Generator synthesizes a batch of N
candidate problem–answer pairs {(xn, an)}N
i=1. Then, for illustrative purposes, consider a single pair
(x, a)in these generated questions.
As the Prompt Generator may generate questions that beyond the verification ability of the Generative
Reward Model, we first evaluate its validity using the current Generative Reward Model: the GRM
performs K independent rollouts to assess the correctness of(x, a), producing a set of scores{sk}K
k=1.
5
The average score ¯sis compared against a predefined threshold C. Only if ¯s > Cis (x, a) retained
as a valid problem instance, otherwise,(x, a)will be discarded.
For each valid (x, a), we then store the pair into the Policy Model training set D(t)
P M, ensuring
that high-quality tasks contribute to downstream policy learning. Additionally, to compute the
reinforcement reward signal for the Prompt Generator, we let the current Policy Model attempt to
solve x via M rollouts, yielding a set of responses {ym}M
m=1. The GRM then scores each response,
resulting in corresponding verification scores{s m}M
m=1. These scores play a dual role:
• We add the triples{(x m, ym, sm)}M
m=1 to the GRM’s training dataD(t)
GRM oftth iteration.
• We measure the entropy of this score distribution, rPG = Entropy(s 1, s2, . . . , sm) and use it
as the reward signal to update the Prompt Generator’s parameters. Intuitively, higher entropy
indicates that the task elicits diverse performance from the Policy Model, reflecting informative
and discriminative task design.
Phase 2: Generative Reward Model Training.In this phase, the Generative Reward Model is
optimized to produce evaluation scores that are both consistent and faithful to verifiable correctness.
Given a problem–solution pair (x, y) the GRM performs N independent rollouts, yielding a set of
predicted scores {ˆsn}N
n=1. For each predicted score ˆs, we compare it against the reference score
s. This comparison produces a binary correctness indicator for each rollout, reflecting whether the
GRM’s judgment matches the reference evaluation.
This binary correctness signal is then served as the reward for GRM rGRM and used to update the
GRM’s parameters via reinforcement learning, following the RLVR (Reinforcement Learning with
Verifiable Rewards) paradigm. By grounding its learning signal in rule-based verification, the GRM
incrementally improves its ability to assign precise and reliable scores to diverse model outputs,
which in turn strengthens downstream policy optimization.
Phase 3: Policy Model Training.In this phase, the Policy Model is trained to improve its problem-
solving ability on tasks generated by the Prompt Generator. For a given problem x, the Policy Model
performs N independent rollouts, producing a set of candidate answers {yn}N
n=1. Each answer is
then evaluated by the Generative Reward Model (GRM), yielding a corresponding set of scores
{sn}N
n=1. These scores play a dual role:
• Reinforcement signal for the Policy Model — the collection {sn}N
n=1 is directly used as the reward
signal rP M in the Policy Model’s RL optimization objective, encouraging it to maximize expected
performance over the task distribution.
• Difficulty feedback for the Prompt Generator — we compute the average score ¯s= 1
N
PN
n=1 sn. If
¯s >0.5, the task is considered too easy for the current Policy Model; we then assign a difficulty flag
f=HARDER , indicating that the Prompt Generator should increase task difficulty in subsequent
iterations. Conversely, if ¯s≤0.5, the task is considered too challenging, and we set f=EASIER ,
signaling that the Prompt Generator should generate simpler variants. Finally, each triplet (x, a, f),
where a is the reference answer of x, is stored into the Prompt Generator’s training datasetD(t)
P G
for use in the next iteration.
3.4 CLOSED-LOOPEVOLUTION
ASL will continuously cycle through the three training phases above for self-learning. Phase 1 will
stop when the number of D(t)
P M reaches a certain threshold, and Phases 2 and 3 will stop when their
respective training rewards converge. Through the cyclic optimization of these three roles, ASL
implements a self-reinforcing curriculum: the Prompt Generator gradually proposes more challenging
tasks, the Policy Model adapts to solve them more effectively, and the Generative Reward Model
continuously refines its evaluation criteria. Since all roles share parameters, skill improvements in
one role naturally benefit the others, accelerating overall capability enhancement. Over time, ASL
enables the LLM to autonomously expand both its problem-solving range and evaluation robustness
without any direct human supervision.
6
4 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we first introduce the settings used in our experiments (§4.1), then we conducted a
series of experiments to answer the following three research questions:
•RQ1:Can ASL effectively train the LLM agent compared to existing methods? (§4.2)
•RQ2:Does the three roles in ASL co-evolve during the training process? (§4.3)
• RQ3:What factors might limit the ongoing evolution of ASL and how can we mitigate them?
(§4.4)
4.1 SETTINGS
Models and Framework.Following the experimental setup adopted in SEARCH-R1 Jin et al. (2025),
we conduct experiments with Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct. For the retrieval component, the 2018 Wikipedia
dump (Karpukhin et al., 2020) is used as the knowledge corpus, and we employ the E5 retriever
(Wang et al., 2022). The system prompts that used for format and tool description can be found in
Appendix A. The number of retrieved passages is fixed to 3 across all methods. For the training
framework, we implement the agentic reinforcement learning component based on VeRL Sheng et al.
(2024). The user prompts and generation examples of three roles can be found in Appendix A,B.
Data.We conduct evaluation on seven widely-used benchmark datasets, covering both general and
multi-hop question answering scenarios. Thegeneral QAcategory includesNatural Questions(NQ)
Kwiatkowski et al. (2019),TriviaQA(Joshi et al., 2017), andPopQA(Mallen et al., 2022). The
multi-hop QAcategory consists ofHotpotQA(Yang et al., 2018),2WikiMultiHopQA(Ho et al.,
2020),MuSiQue(Trivedi et al., 2022), andBamboogle(Press et al., 2022). These datasets span
a diverse set of search and reasoning challenges, enabling a comprehensive assessment of model
performance across both in-domain and out-of-domain settings.
Baselines.We select the following agent training and self-evolving methods for comparison.
• Search-R1Jin et al. (2025) Search-R1 directly brought the RLVR paradigm used in OpenAI o1
Jaech et al. (2024) and DeepSeek-R1 Guo et al. (2025) to the training scenario of search agent.
• Absolute ZeroZhao et al. Absolute Zero proposed a Proposer-Solver self-play framework. It
proposes to encourage Proposer to generate low (but non-zero) success rate questions and verify
the correctness of Solver through Python execution. We implement the Absolute Zero training in
our agentic search-based QA setting.
• R-ZeroHuang et al. R-Zero proposed a Challenger-Solver co-evolving framework. It leverages an
uncertainty reward and repetition penalty to guide the training of Challenger and trains the Solver
through RLVR. We implement the R-Zero training in our agentic search-based QA setting.
4.2 ASLVS BASELINES
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
Steps
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35T est Accuracy
Search-R1
R-Zero
Absolute Zero
ASL
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
Figure 4: The test accuracy of LLM agents trained
by ASL and baseline methods.
We first compare ASL with other agent training
methods. As shown in Figure 4, Search-r1, an
RLVR approach trained on real data, achieves
the best performance early in training but then
quickly converges and degrades due to poorer
generalization. Absolute Zero and R-zero show
similar behavior: they make substantial gains
in the first two iterations with Proposer/Chal-
lenger generating harder questions are Solver
effectively learn from the tasks, but they then
stall and enter a plateau in the third iteration
and later. In contrast, ASL steadily improves
the agent’s capability over multiple iterations
and ultimately surpasses search-r1 even under
zero-data conditions.
7
4.3 SYNERGISTICCO-EVOLUTION OF THETHREEROLES
We track how the three roles in ASL—Prompt Generator, Generative Reward Model, and Policy
Model evolve across iterations. As shown in Figure 5, the closed-loop training leads to the following
coordinated improvements:
Question generation strength: In each iteration, we sample 2,000 generated questions and have
the same fixed evaluator (Search-r1 trained for 1,024 steps) solve them. The blue bars plot this
accuracy. As iterations progress, the accuracy generally declines, indicating that the generator
produces increasingly challenging problems that better stress a fixed solver.
Verification strength: We build a verification test set from the original test set by representing each
ground-truth pair (q, a+) as (q, a+;correct) , and using GPT-4o-mini to synthesize a wrong answer
a−, yielding (q, a−;wrong) . The green bars show the GRM’s accuracy on this verify set, which
rises with each iteration, evidencing stronger discrimination between correct and incorrect solutions.
Solving strength: The yellow bars report the policy model’s task solving accuracy. This steadily
increases across iterations, showing that the solver benefits from harder questions and sharper
supervision from the verifier.
Together, these trends demonstrate that ASL drives a virtuous cycle: stronger question-setting and
stricter verification improve the training signal, which in turn elevates solving performance; the
improved solver and verifier then enable the generator to craft even harder questions. ASL thus
advances question generation, judging, and solving in tandem.
4.4 IDENTIFYING ANDLIFTING THECEILING OFASL
iteration 0 iteration 1 iteration 2 iteration 3
Iteration
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8T est Acc (mean@1)
0.181
0.316
0.370 0.380
0.865
0.671
0.607
0.747
0.547
0.762
0.537
0.779
Generated Problem Solved ACC
Verifying ACC
Solving ACC
Figure 5: Comparison across iterations. Blue:
accuracy of a fixed evaluator (Search-r1, trained
1,024 steps) on 2,000 questions generated in each
iteration—lower values indicate harder generated
problems. Green: GRM accuracy on the verify
set constructed from (q, a+;correct) and GPT-4o-
mini–derived negatives (q, a−;wrong) —higher is
better judgment. Yellow: policy model solving ac-
curacy—steadily improving. These patterns show
the three roles co-evolve under ASL.
Identify reward hacking.An important factor
limiting RL scaling is reward hacking. To in-
vestigate whether the hacking of policy model
towards GRM is the bottleneck in ASL’s evolu-
tion, we ablate the GRM training phase and plot
the resulting training and testing curves (Fig-
ure 6a). In the early iterations, the system ex-
hibits a healthy co-evolutionary dynamic: the
Prompt Generator (PG) progressively proposes
harder problems, while the Policy Model (PM)
correspondingly improves its solving ability dur-
ing its training phase. Each time the training
stage switches from one component to the other,
we observe a sharp drop in rewards. This drop
reflects the sudden increase in the counterpart’s
capability—PG confronts a stronger solver, and
PM faces more challenging prompts—exactly
the kind of “difficulty escalates, ability catches
up” rhythm one expects from a well-structured
training loop.
However, by the third cycle a failure mode
emerges. Because the GRM is not explictly
trained and therefore has limited verification ability, the PG learns to generate problems that are
excessively difficult or even unsolvable. These prompts lie far outside the GRM’s calibration range,
causing its scores on such out-of-distribution inputs to become effectively random. The resulting high
uncertainty inflates the entropy-based reward signal, which the PG then exploits to obtain spuriously
high returns. This is a textbook instance of reward hacking: the reward becomes decoupled from true
problem quality or solvability, and the PG is incentivized to game the scoring mechanism rather than
improve the curriculum.
Consequently, the PM cannot extract meaningful learning signal from unsolvable prompts and fails
to make further progress, leading to a plateau in test performance. Taken together, these dynamics
indicate that a non-updating GRM not only becomes the bottleneck for ASL’s evolution but also opens
8
the door to exploitative behaviors, underscoring the necessity of co-training or continual calibration
of the reward model to track the evolving data distribution.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Steps
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Training Reward Score
PG training iteration 1 PG training iteration 2 PG training iteration 3
PM training iteration 1 PM training iteration 2 PM training iteration 3
HACKED
rPG (raw)
rPG (smoothed)
rPM (raw)
rPM (smoothed)
T est Accuracy
0.175
0.200
0.225
0.250
0.275
0.300
0.325
0.350
0.375
T est Accuracy
(a) The training and testing curve of ASL while
GRM is NOT trained. The system exhibits a healthy
co-evolutionary dynamic in early iterations but then
trapped in reward hacking.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
Steps
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40T est Accuracy
Without training GRM
training GRM with generated data
training GRM with real data
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
(b) The test accuracy of LLM agents by ASL while
1) GRM is NOT trained, 2) GRM is trained with self-
generated data, and 3) GRM is trained with real data
in the third iteration.
Figure 6: The reward hacking phenomenon will occur in agentic self-learning while GRM is not
trained. It can be effectively mitigate through training GRM with self-generated data or real data.
Mitigating reward hacking.When we reintroduce the GRM training phase into the ASL loop,
the early reward hacking behavior is substantially reduced (Figure 6b). Co-training the GRM with
the evolving distribution of prompts and solutions stabilizes its scoring on harder inputs, dampens
spurious entropy rewards, and allows ASL to make steady progress for a longer training horizon.
In other words, as PG proposes more challenging problems and PM adapts, a concurrently updated
GRM continues to calibrate its judgments, preventing the PG from exploiting scoring blind spots and
preserving a meaningful learning signal for PM.
That said, even with GRM training we observe gradual convergence after several iterations, suggesting
a capacity ceiling governed by the GRM’s verification ability. To test whether strengthening the
GRM can lift this ceiling, we augment the GRM training in the third iteration with a small amount of
real verification data (1% of the Search-R1 training data, constructed through the same method in
§4.3). This targeted calibration further improves PM’s downstream solving performance and raises
the test accuracy compared to training the GRM solely on self-generated data, as reflected by the
right-hand curves in Figure 6b.
These findings indicate that ASL’s upper bound is effectively determined by the GRM’s capability.
Self-learning can progressively push the GRM’s boundary by exposing it to the current distribution
of prompts and solutions, yielding longer and more productive training. Moreover, injecting a modest
amount of real verification data in later stages provides a strong anchor for the GRM, refreshes the
system’s ceiling, and unlocks additional gains. In practice, this suggests a two-phase strategy: rely
on self-generated data to continually calibrate the GRM during most of training, then apply a small,
carefully curated real-data boost to the GRM to extend ASL’s effectiveness in the final rounds.
5 CONCLUSION
Contributions.In this work, we present Agentic Self-Learning (ASL), a novel multi-role, closed-
loop reinforcement learning framework for training LLM-based agents without human supervision or
pre-defined rule-based rewards. By unifying task generation (Prompt Generator), solution synthesis
(Policy Model), and adaptive evaluation (Generative Reawrd Model) within a shared backbone
and tool environment, ASL enables these components to co-evolve through iterative reinforcement
signals. Our controlled studies reveal two pivotal factors for scalable agentic RL: the source of
reward signals and the scale of agent-generated task data. ASL addresses both by (i) replacing brittle
rule-based judges with a co-trained GRM capable of nuanced verification, and (ii) continuously
expanding the training distribution through adaptive task generation informed by entropy-based
difficulty control. Empirical results across diverse open-domain QA benchmarks demonstrate that
ASL not only surpasses recent self-evolving agents (Search-R1, Absolute Zero, R-Zero) in long-term
9
improvement but also avoids common reward-hacking pitfalls through GRM co-training. Moreover,
we identify that GRM can be the bottleneck of the long-time evolving of ASL framework, and
injecting small amounts of high-quality real verification data into late-stage GRM training further
lifts the performance ceiling, suggesting a practical and scalable hybrid strategy.
Limitations and Outlook.Looking forward, the ASL framework provides a general recipe for
autonomous agent development, supporting open-ended reasoning, adaptive curricula, and robust
reward modeling. However, our current studies are limited to the scenario of text-based search agent.
Future work could extend ASL to multimodal agents, multi-turn planning domains, and real-world
interactive platforms, paving the way for truly self-improving, domain-agnostic AI systems.
ETHICSSTATEMENT
This paper proposes the Agentic Self-Learning framework. All experiments are conducted on publicly
available datasets. Thus there is no data privacy concern. Meanwhile, this paper does not involve
human annotations, and there are no related ethical concerns.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The data and code of this paper are released at https://github.com/forangel2014/Towards-Agentic-
Self-Learning
REFERENCES
Nikolas Belle, Dakota Barnes, Alfonso Amayuelas, Ivan Bercovich, Xin Eric Wang, and William
Wang. Agents of change: Self-evolving LLM agents for strategic planning. URL http://
arxiv.org/abs/2506.04651.
Huan-ang Gao, Jiayi Geng, Wenyue Hua, Mengkang Hu, Xinzhe Juan, Hongzhang Liu, Shilong
Liu, Jiahao Qiu, Xuan Qi, Yiran Wu, Hongru Wang, Han Xiao, Yuhang Zhou, Shaokun Zhang,
Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Yixiong Fang, Qiwen Zhao, Dongrui Liu, Qihan Ren, Cheng Qian,
Zhenghailong Wang, Minda Hu, Huazheng Wang, Qingyun Wu, Heng Ji, and Mengdi Wang. A
survey of self-evolving agents: On path to artificial super intelligence. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2507.21046.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms
via reinforcement learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. Constructing a multi-hop
qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps.arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01060,
2020.
Chengsong Huang, Wenhao Yu, Xiaoyang Wang, Hongming Zhang, Zongxia Li, Ruosen Li, Jiaxin
Huang, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. R-zero: Self-evolving reasoning LLM from zero data. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.05004.
Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec
Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, et al. Openai o1 system card.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.16720, 2024.
Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and
Jiawei Han. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement
learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516, 2025.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension.arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551, 2017.
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick SH Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi
Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. InEMNLP
(1), pp. 6769–6781, 2020.
10
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: a
benchmark for question answering research.Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 7:453–466, 2019.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Daniel Khashabi.
When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness and limitations of parametric and
non-parametric memories.arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10511, 7, 2022.
Alexander Novikov, Ngân V˜u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wag-
ner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan
Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Push-
meet Kohli, and Matej Balog. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery.
URLhttp://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350,
2022.
Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng,
Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework.arXiv preprint
arXiv: 2409.19256, 2024.
Dingfeng Shi, Jingyi Cao, Qianben Chen, Weichen Sun, Weizhen Li, Hongxuan Lu, Fangchen Dong,
Tianrui Qin, King Zhu, Minghao Liu, Jian Yang, Ge Zhang, Jiaheng Liu, Changwang Zhang,
Jun Wang, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, and Wangchunshu Zhou. TaskCraft: Automated generation of
agentic tasks, a. URLhttp://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10055.
Tianyuan Shi, Canbin Huang, Fanqi Wan, Longguang Zhong, Ziyi Yang, Weizhou Shen, Xiaojun
Quan, and Ming Yan. Mutual-taught for Co-adapting policy and reward models, b. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2506.06292.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning.
Huatong Song, Jinhao Jiang, Yingqian Min, Jie Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Lei Fang, and
Ji-Rong Wen. R1-searcher: Incentivizing the search capability in llms via reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05592, 2025.
Wangtao Sun, Xuanqing Yu, Shizhu He, Jun Zhao, and Kang Liu. Expnote: Black-box large language
models are better task solvers with experience notebook.arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07032, 2023.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. musique: Multihop
questions via single-hop question composition.Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 10:539–554, 2022.
Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Majumder,
and Furu Wei. Text embeddings by weakly-supervised contrastive pre-training.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.03533, 2022.
Zhepei Wei, Wenlin Yao, Yao Liu, Weizhi Zhang, Qin Lu, Liang Qiu, Changlong Yu, Puyang Xu,
Chao Zhang, Bing Yin, Hyokun Yun, and Lihong Li. WebAgent-R1: Training web agents via end-
to-end multi-turn reinforcement learning. URLhttp://arxiv.org/abs/2505.16421.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
and Christopher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
answering.arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09600, 2018.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
2022.
Junjie Zhang, Jingyi Xi, Zhuoyang Song, Junyu Lu, Yuhua Ke, Ting Sun, Yukun Yang, Jiaxing Zhang,
Songxin Zhang, and Zejian Xie. L0: Reinforcement learning to become general agents.
11
Andrew Zhao, Yiran Wu, Yang Yue, Tong Wu, Quentin Xu, Yang Yue, Matthieu Lin, Shenzhi Wang,
Qingyun Wu, Zilong Zheng, and Gao Huang. Absolute zero: Reinforced self-play reasoning with
zero data. URLhttp://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03335.
Yifei Zhou, Sergey Levine, Jason Weston, Xian Li, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Self-challenging
language model agents. URLhttp://arxiv.org/abs/2506.01716.
A PROMPTS
System Prompt for Generative Reward Model and Policy Model
You are Qwen, created by Alibaba Cloud. You are a helpful assistant.
## Tools
You are provided with function signatures within <tools></tools> tags:
<tools>
Name:retrieve
Description: Retrieve relevant information from the locally deployed knowledge base based
on the provided list of search terms.
Input:’query’: ’Optional/Required’: ’required’, ’Parameter Description’: ’search terms’,
’Parameter Type’: ’str’
</tools>
For each function call, you should call and then include the json format inputs within
<tool_call></tool_call> tags, for example:
<tool_call>
{
"name": tool[’name’],
"arguments": tool[’arguments’]
}
</tool_call>
For each function call, the result will be returned in the <tool_response></tool_response>
tags.
## Formats
Your output should be a combination of the following formats:
1. <think>your reasoning thoughts</think>
2. <tool_call>
{
"name": "retrieve",
"arguments": {"query": "Beijing cuisine"}
}
</tool_call>
3. <answer>YOUR ANSWER</answer>
## Tasks
Answer the user’s question.
You can use <think></think> and <tool_call></tool_call> as many times as you want, but
you must use <answer></answer> once and only once at the end of your response.
Your answer should be concise and to the point, without detailed illustrations. For example,
<answer>Beijing</answer>.
Figure 7: System prompt for the Generative Reward Model and Policy Model.
12
System Prompt for Prompt Generator
You are Qwen, created by Alibaba Cloud. You are a helpful assistant.
## Tools
You are provided with function signatures within <tools></tools> tags:
<tools>
Name:retrieve
Description: Retrieve relevant information from the locally deployed knowledge base based
on the provided list of search terms.
Input:’query’: ’Optional/Required’: ’required’, ’Parameter Description’: ’search terms’,
’Parameter Type’: ’str’
</tools>
For each function call, you should call and then include the json format inputs within
<tool_call></tool_call> tags, for example:
<tool_call>
{
"name": tool[’name’],
"arguments": tool[’arguments’]
}
</tool_call>
For each function call, the result will be returned in the <tool_response></tool_response>
tags.
## Tasks
generate a question and answer that satisfying the user’s request.
You can use <think></think> and <tool_call></tool_call> as many times as you want, but
you must use <question></question> and <answer></answer> once and only once at the end
of your response.
Your question should be about factual knowledge and can be answered with ONLY ONE
concreate entity.
Your answer should be concise and to the point, without detailed illustrations.
For example:
<question>What is the capital of China?</question>
<answer>Beijing</answer>
## Formats
Your output should be a combination of the following formats:
1. <think>your reasoning thoughts</think>
2. <tool_call>
{
"name": "retrieve",
"arguments": {"query": "Beijing cuisine"}
}
</tool_call>
3. <question>YOUR GENERATED QUESTION</question>
4. <answer>YOUR ANSWER</answer>
Figure 8: System prompt for the Prompt Generator.
13
User Prompt for Prompt Generator At Iteration 0
Please generate a question about {topic}.
The question should be about factual knowledge and can be answered with ONLY ONE
concreate entity.
Use the tool to help you generate the question, ensure that the question is solvable and the
tool is necessary to answer the question.
Output with the following format:
<question>
...a generated question...
</question>
<answer>
...the answer to the generated question...
</answer>
Figure 9: User prompt for Prompt Generator tt iteration 0.
User Prompt for Prompt Generator At Iteration 1
I asked a question to my students:
{question_prompt}
The true answer to this question is:
{answer_to_question}
Most student {answer_type}LY answer this question, therefore, to better train my students, I
want you to generate a {question_type} question based on the current question.
You should generate the new question that is similar to the current question but requires new
knowledge and is {question_type} to answer.
Follow the following instructions to generate the new question:
1. The new question should be about factual knowledge and can be answered with ONLY
ONE concreate entity.
2. Use the tool to help you generate the new question.
3. The question must be solvable and the tool must be necessary to answer the question. Your
final output should be of the following formats:
<question>
...a new question...
</question>
<answer>
...the answer to the new question...
</answer>
Figure 10: User prompt for Prompt Generator at iteration 1.
14
User Prompt for Prompt Generator At Later Iterations
I asked a question to my students:
{question_prompt}
The true answer to this question is:
{answer_to_question}
Most student {answer_type}LY answer this question, therefore, to better train my students, I
want you to generate a {question_type} question based on the current question.
You should use the tool to retrieve the relevant infomation about the question, then generate
the new question by {question_constraint} one reasoning hop to the current question.
e.g. {demo}
The new question should be about factual knowledge and can be answered with ONLY ONE
concreate entity.
Output with the following format:
<question>
...a new question...
</question>
<answer>
...the answer to the new question...
</answer>
Figure 11: User Prompt for Prompt Generator At Later Iterations
User Prompt for Generative Reward Model
I asked a question to my student:
{question_prompt}
My student’s answer is:
{completion}
I want you to help me verify the correctness of my student’s answer.
Use the tool and thinking to analyze, then draw your conclusion in the following format:
<answer>
conclusion: correct/wrong
</answer>
Figure 12: User prompt for Prompt Generator at later iterations.
15
Example of Prompt Generator
<think>
To generate a harder question, I first need to retrieve information about baharat and Tavuk
gö˘gsü recipe to understand the context. Then I will add one reasoning hop by identifying a
related ingredient or concept.
</think>
<tool_call>
{ "name": "retrieve", "arguments": { "query": "baharat Tavuk gö˘gsü" } }
</tool_call>
<|im_start|>user
<tool_response>
id: 3686413
content:
"Tavuk gö˘gsü"
Tavuk gö˘gsü Tavuk gö ˘gsü (, , ""chicken breast"") is a Turkish milk pudding made with
shredded chicken breast. It became one of the most famous delicacies served to the Ottoman
sultans in the Topkapı Palace. It is today considered a signature dish of Turkey. The
traditional version uses white chicken breast meat, preferably freshly slaughtered capon. The
meat is softened by boiling and separated into very fine fibers or ""rillettes"". Modern recipes
often pound the meat into a fine powder instead. The meat is mixed with milk, sugar, cracked
rice and/or other thickeners, and often some sort of flavoring such
id: 3686414
content:
"Tavuk gö˘gsü"
as cinnamon. The result is a thick pudding often shaped for presentation. The dish is very
similar to the medieval ""white dish"", ""blancmange"" that was common in the upper-class
cuisine of Europe, and mentioned in ""The Canterbury Tales"" (though blancmange has
since evolved into very different forms in modern Europe and Latin America). Tavuk
gö˘gsü Tavuk gö˘gsü (, , ""chicken breast"") is a Turkish milk pudding made with shredded
chicken breast. It became one of the most famous delicacies served to the Ottoman sultans
in the Topkapı Palace. It is today considered a signature dish of Turkey. The traditional version
id: 5389908
content:
"Göksu, Mut"
Göksu, Mut Göksu is a town in Mersin Province, Turkey. Göksu at is a part of Mut district
of Mersin Province. It is from Mut and from Mersin. The population is 2146 as of 2012
The road to the town diverges from the Mersin-Karaman highway at around the Alahan
Monastery. (But while the monastery is to the east, the town is to the west) The town is
established in 1995 by merging four neighboring villages, namely Kravga, Bayır, Esen and
Köprüba¸ sı.
</tool_response><|im_end|>
<|im_start|>assistant
# <think> and <tool_call> for 5 more rounds
<think>
From the retrieved information, I can identify that baharat typically includes spices like
cinnamon, cloves, and black pepper. Since cinnamon is a common ingredient in Tavuk gö˘gsü,
a harder question could be about a baharat spice that is not commonly found in Tavuk gö˘gsü.
</think>
<question> What is a common ingredient in baharat that is not typically found in traditional
Tavuk gö˘gsü? </question>
<answer> mace </answer>
Figure 13: Example of Prompt Generator.
16
Example of Policy Model
<think>
Let’s retrieve information about solo artists known for their "Beatlesque" style to find the
answer.
</think>
<tool_call> { "name": "retrieve", "arguments": { "query": "Beatlesque solo artist" } }
</tool_call>
<|im_start|>user
<tool_response>
id: 196567
content:
Beatlesque
Beatlesque ""Beatlesque"" () or ""Beatles-esque"" describes a musical resemblance to
the English rock band the Beatles. The term’s definition lacks consensus and it has been
applied inconsistently to a wide number of disparate artists. To better explain what the word
might mean, eight possible answers were formulated by radio producer Kevin Howlett,
music professor Rob Bowman, and Klaatu drummer Terry Draper: ""Toronto Star""s Jack
Sakamoto commented: ""[some people’s] notion of that sound includes everyone from Panic!
at the Disco to Billy Joel to the Red Hot Chili Peppers.
id: 196568
content:
Beatlesque
for the adjective their music has spawned."" Notable acts described as ""Beatlesque"" Other
Beatlesque ""Beatlesque"" () or ""Beatles-esque"" describes a musical resemblance to the
English rock band the Beatles. The term’s definition lacks consensus and it has been applied
inconsistently to a wide number of disparate artists. To better explain what the word might
mean, eight possible answers were formulated by radio producer Kevin Howlett
id: 14870332
content:
"George Harrison"
George Harrison George Harrison (25 February 1943 – 29 November 2001) was an English
musician, singer-songwriter, music and film producer who achieved international fame as the
lead guitarist of the Beatles. Often referred to as ""the quiet Beatle"", Harrison embraced
Indian culture and helped broaden the scope of popular music through his incorporation of
Indian instrumentation and Hindu-aligned spirituality in the Beatles’ work.
</tool_response><|im_end|>
<|im_start|>assistant
# <think> and <tool_call> for 2 more rounds
<think>
From the information retrieved, George Harrison’s post-Beatles career continued to be "Beat-
lesque". He maintained a connection to the Beatles sound and style in his solo work, including
with the band Traveling Wilburys. However, to directly answer the question about a solo
artist known for his "Beatlesque" career, let’s conclude with the most relevant find.
</think>
<answer>
George Harrison, often known as "the quiet Beatle," was a significant figure who continued to
be "Beatlesque" in his solo career, especially through his work with the Traveling Wilburys.
However, if we are looking for a solo artist who is specifically referenced as "Beatlesque," no-
table acts such as Billy Joel, who has been described as "Beatlesque," could fit the description
based on various interpretations of the term. Nonetheless, George Harrison is a prominent
example of an artist who maintained and continued the "Beatlesque" legacy in his solo work.
</answer>
Figure 14: Example of Policy Model.
17
Example of Generative Reward Model
<think>
To verify the student’s answer, we need to check if "Pinko Cronkite" was indeed the nickname
Archie Bunker used and if it was inspired by "Sklanton" or "Slickdan" from Popeye’s comic
strip.
</think>
<tool_call> { "name": "retrieve", "arguments": { "query": "Archie Bunker Pinko Cronkite
All in the Family" } } </tool_call>
<|im_start|>user
<tool_response>
id: 12892536
content:
"Walter Cronkite"
popular situation comedy ""All in the Family"", during which the lead character Archie
Bunker would sometimes complain about the newsman, calling him ""Pinko Cronkite.""
Cronkite trained himself to speak at a rate of 124 words per minute in his newscasts, so that
viewers could clearly understand him. In contrast, Americans average about 165 words per
minute, and fast, difficult-to-understand talkers speak close to 200 words per minute. In 1968,
the faculty of the E. W. Scripps School of Journalism at Ohio University voted to award
Cronkite the Carr Van Anda Award ""for enduring contributions to journalism."" In 1970,
Cronkite received
id: 864474
content:
"Archie Bunker"
Archie Bunker Archibald ""Archie"" Bunker is a fictional character from the 1970s American
television sitcom ""All in the Family"" and its spin-off ""Archie Bunker’s Place"", played
by Carroll O’Connor. Bunker, a main character of the series, is a World War II veteran,
blue-collar worker, and family man. Described as a ""lovable bigot"", he was first seen by the
American public when ""All in the Family"" premiered on January 12, 1971, where he was
depicted as the head of the Bunker family.
id: 15975305
content:
"All in the Family"
All in the Family All in the Family is an American sitcom TV-series that was originally
broadcast on the CBS television network for nine seasons, from January 12, 1971 to April 8,
1979. The following September, it was continued with the spin-off series"" Archie Bunker’s
Place"", which picked up where ""All in the Family"" had ended and ran for four more
seasons. ""All in the Family"" was produced by Norman Lear and Bud Yorkin. It starred
Carroll O’Connor, Jean Stapleton, Sally Struthers, and Rob Reiner.
</tool_response><|im_end|>
<|im_start|>assistant
# <think> and <tool_call> for 1 more rounds
<think>
The retrieved information does not provide any details about the inspiration for the nickname
"Pinko Cronkite" being derived from "Sklanton" or "Slickdan" from Popeye’s comic strip.
Therefore, the student’s answer seems to contain inaccurate information regarding the origin
of the nickname.
</think>
<answer>
conclusion: wrong
</answer>
Figure 15: Example of Generative Reward Model.
18
B GENERATIONEXAMPLES OFTHREEROLES INASL
C THEUSE OFLARGELANGUAGEMODELS
We used LLMs to assist with part of the translation and language polishing during the preparation of
this paper.
19
